---
layout: post
title: "SICP Solutions: Sections 1.2.3 and 1.2.4"
date: "2017-06-16T17:23:35+03:00"
katex: True
---

### Section 1.2.3 - Orders of Growth

#### Exercise 1.14

The tree is big :)

The recursive process reaches maximum depth when the denomination is a penny,
for example `(cc 11 1)` will be $$11$$. This means that the growth of space will
be $$\Theta(n)$$, where $$n$$ is the amount we want to change.

For each denomination sub-tree, the maximum steps we will need to calculate is
where the only remaining denomination is the penny, and the steps required will
be exactly $$n$$. Since we have $$5$$ denominations, the time complexity will be
$$O(n^5)$$.

#### Exercise 1.15

##### a.

The procedure `p` will be applied each time `angle` is greater than $$0.1$$.
Between iterations, `angle` will be divided by $$3$$. This means that with a
starting `angle` of $$12.15$$ we will have `p` applied for $$12.15, 4.16, 1.38,
0.46$$ and finally for $$0.15$$. So `p` will be applied $$5$$ times.

##### b.

The space required will be growing on the order of $$O(\log_3(n))$$, because each
step will require to remember its parent to return to. Similarly, the time
required will be $$O(\log_3(n))$$ as well.

### Section 1.2.4 - Exponentiation

#### Exercise 1.16

Using the definition of `even?` from before:

{% highlight scheme %}
(define (fast-expr b n)
  (fast-expr-iter b n 1))

(define (fast-expr-iter b n a)
  (cond ((= n 1) a)
        ((even? n) (fast-expr-iter b
                                   (/ n 2)
                                   (* a (* b b))))
        (else (fast-expr-iter b (- n 1) (* a b)))))

(fast-expr 2 3)
{% endhighlight %}

#### Exercise 1.17

A recursive process:

{% highlight scheme %}
(define (double a) (* 2 a))

(define (halve a) (/ a 2))

(define (fast-multi a b)
  (cond ((= a 1) b)
        ((even? a) (fast-multi (halve a) (double b)))
        (else (+ b (fast-multi (- a 1) b)))))

(fast-multi 5 8)
{% endhighlight %}

#### Exercise 1.18

Similarly to exercise 1.16, we will use a variable as accumulator:

{% highlight scheme %}
(define (double a) (* 2 a))

(define (halve a) (/ a 2))

(define (fast-mult a b)
  (fast-mult-iter a b 0))

(define (fast-mult-iter a b n)
  (cond ((= a 0) n)
        ((even? a) (fast-mult-iter (halve a) (double b) n))
        (else (fast-mult-iter (- a 1) b (+ b n)))))

(fast-multi 5 8)
{% endhighlight %}

#### Exercise 1.19

First, we need to apply $$T$$ twice, to compute $$T^2$$. We start with:

$$
\begin{align*}
  a &\leftarrow bq + aq + ap\\
  b &\leftarrow bp + aq
\end{align*}
$$

Which will then become:

$$
\begin{align*}
  a &\leftarrow (bp + aq)q + (bp + aq + ap)q + (bq + aq + ap)p\\
  b &\leftarrow (bp + aq)p + (bp + aq + ap)q
\end{align*}
$$

Let's expand the first one:

$$
\begin{align*}
  a &\leftarrow (bp + aq)q + (bp + aq + ap)q + (bq + aq + ap)p\\
    &= bpq + aq^2 + bq^2 + aq^2 + apq + bpq + apq + ap^2 \\
    &= b(2pq + q^2) + a(2pq + q^2) + a(q^2 + p^2)
\end{align*}
$$

And in the same manner the second one:

$$
\begin{align*}
  b &\leftarrow (bp + aq)p + (bp + aq + ap)q\\
    &= bp^2 + apq + bq^2 + aq^2 + apq\\
    &= b(p^2 + q^2) + a(2pq + q^2)
\end{align*}
$$

So it turns out that we can name variables $$p'$$ and $$q'$$:

$$
\begin{align*}
  p' &= p^2 + q^2\\
  q' &= 2pq + q^2
\end{align*}
$$

These values will essentially square $$T$$. So the logarithimic version of the
Fibonacci procedure can be written as:

{% highlight scheme %}
(define (square n) (* n n))

(define (fib n)
  (fib-iter 1 0 0 1 n))

(define (fib-iter a b p q count)
  (cond ((= count 0) b)
        ((even? count)
         (fib-iter a
                   b
                   (+ (square p) (square q))
                   (+ (* 2 p q) (square q))
                   (/ count 2)))
        (else (fib-iter (+ (* b q) (* a q) (* a p))
                        (+ (* b p) (* a q))
                        p
                        q
                        (- count 1)))))

(fib 9)
{% endhighlight %}
